AGENTIC AI - STUDY NOTES

1.  What is Agentic AI? Agentic AI refers to AI systems that can
    understand a goal, reason about the steps needed to achieve it, use
    tools, observe results, and take further actions with limited human
    intervention.

A traditional LLM mainly generates a response to a prompt. An AI agent
can: - Understand a goal - Break the goal into tasks - Decide what
action to take - Use external tools - Observe the result - Correct or
change its approach - Continue until the goal is completed

Basic flow:

User Goal | v Reasoning / Planning | v Action / Tool Use | v Observation
| +—-> Continue / Re-plan | v Final Result

2.  LLM vs AI Agent

LLM: - Primarily generates text. - Usually responds to a single
prompt. - Does not inherently perform actions. - May have no persistent
state or tool access.

AI Agent: - Uses an LLM as its reasoning component. - Can call tools
such as APIs, databases, search engines, calculators, or code
interpreters. - Maintains state or memory when required. - Can execute
multi-step workflows. - Can react to tool outputs and errors.

3.  Main Components of an AI Agent

A. LLM / Reasoning Model The LLM acts as the reasoning engine.
Examples: - GPT models - Claude - Gemini - Llama - Mistral

B. Tools Tools allow the agent to interact with the outside world.

Examples: - Web search - Calculator - Python/code execution - Database
queries - REST APIs - Email - File systems - Cloud services

C. Memory Memory allows an agent to retain useful information.

Types: - Short-term memory: information from the current
task/conversation. - Long-term memory: information stored for future
interactions.

D. Planning Planning determines the sequence of actions required to
accomplish a goal.

Example: Goal: Find the cheapest flight and prepare a travel plan.

Possible plan: 1. Search flights. 2. Compare prices. 3. Check baggage
rules. 4. Select suitable flight. 5. Search hotels. 6. Create itinerary.

4.  Agentic AI Workflow

A common agent loop is:

PERCEIVE -> REASON -> ACT -> OBSERVE -> REASON -> ACT -> …

Perceive: Understand the user request and available information.

Reason: Determine what needs to be done.

Act: Call a tool or perform an operation.

Observe: Read the result of the operation.

Re-plan: If the result is insufficient or unexpected, choose another
action.

Finish: Return the final result when the goal is satisfied.

5.  What is Tool Calling?

Tool calling allows an LLM to request execution of a predefined
function.

Example:

User: “Calculate the average of 10, 20, and 30.”

Agent: 1. Understands that calculation is required. 2. Calls calculator
tool. 3. Receives result = 20. 4. Returns the answer.

The LLM itself may not directly execute the tool. Instead, the
application executes the requested function and provides the result back
to the model.

6.  ReAct Pattern

ReAct stands for Reasoning + Acting.

Conceptually:

Thought -> Action -> Observation -> Thought -> Action -> Observation

Example:

Goal: “What is the weather in Delhi and should I carry an umbrella?”

Agent: 1. Determine that weather information is required. 2. Call
weather API. 3. Observe weather result. 4. Determine whether rain is
expected. 5. Give recommendation.

Modern implementations may hide internal reasoning rather than exposing
it to the user. The important concept is the iterative
action-observation loop.

7.  Agent vs Workflow

Workflow: - Steps are mostly predefined. - Execution path is
predictable. - Good when the process is known.

Agent: - Can dynamically decide which action to take. - Execution path
can change based on observations. - Good when the problem is less
predictable.

Example workflow:

Input -> Validate -> Database -> Generate Report -> Output

Example agent:

Goal -> Decide what information is needed -> Search -> Analyze -> Search
again if necessary -> Produce answer

8.  Single-Agent System

A single agent is responsible for the entire task.

Example: A customer-support agent can: - Read the question. - Search
documentation. - Check customer information. - Create a support
ticket. - Respond to the customer.

Architecture:

User | Agent | +– Search Tool +– Database Tool +– Ticket Tool +– Email
Tool

9.  Multi-Agent System

A multi-agent system uses multiple specialized agents.

Example:

Manager Agent | +– Research Agent +– Data Analysis Agent +– Coding Agent
+– Writing Agent

Each agent has a specific role.

Advantages: - Specialization - Easier separation of responsibilities -
Complex tasks can be divided into smaller tasks

Disadvantages: - More complexity - Higher latency - Higher cost -
Coordination problems - More difficult debugging

10. Agent Memory

Short-Term Memory: Stores information needed during the current
interaction.

Example: User says: “My preferred programming language is Python.”

The agent can use this information later in the same conversation.

Long-Term Memory: Stores information outside the current context.

Common approaches: - Databases - Vector databases - Key-value stores -
User profiles

Vector memory is useful for semantic retrieval.

Example:

User information -> Embedding -> Vector Database | Future query ->
Embedding -> Similarity Search -> Relevant Memory

11. RAG and Agentic AI

RAG stands for Retrieval-Augmented Generation.

Typical RAG:

Question | Retriever | Relevant Documents | LLM | Answer

Agentic RAG adds decision-making.

Question | Agent | Decide whether retrieval is needed | Retriever /
Other Tool | Observe result | Agent | Final Answer

An agent can decide: - Which source to search - Whether more information
is required - Which query to use - Whether to retrieve again - Whether
another tool is more appropriate

12. Agentic RAG Example

User: “Compare the company’s 2024 and 2025 financial performance.”

Agent may: 1. Search for 2024 report. 2. Search for 2025 report. 3.
Extract relevant financial metrics. 4. Compare revenue and profit. 5.
Identify important changes. 6. Generate a summary.

13. LangChain

LangChain is a framework for building applications around LLMs.

It provides components for: - Models - Prompts - Tools - Retrievers -
Document loaders - Memory/state - Agents - Chains

Typical agent architecture:

User | Prompt | LLM | Tool Selection | Tool | Tool Result | LLM | Final
Response

14. LangGraph

LangGraph is a framework for building stateful, graph-based agent
workflows.

Important concepts: - State - Nodes - Edges - Conditional edges -
Checkpoints - Persistence - Human-in-the-loop

A graph can look like:

START | v Agent Node | +—-> Tool Node | | | v +—— Agent Node | v END

The graph can contain loops, which are useful for iterative agents.

15. State in LangGraph

State contains information shared between nodes.

Example state:

{ “user_query”: “…”, “messages”: […], “tool_result”: “…”,
“final_answer”: “…” }

Each node can read the state and update it.

16. Nodes and Edges

Node: A function that performs an operation.

Examples: - Call LLM - Search database - Execute tool - Validate result

Edge: Defines how execution moves from one node to another.

Normal edge: A -> B

Conditional edge: A -> B if condition is true A -> C otherwise

17. Human-in-the-Loop

Human-in-the-loop means the agent pauses and asks a human for approval
or input before performing certain actions.

Useful for: - Financial transactions - Sending important emails -
Deleting data - Production deployments - High-impact decisions

Example:

Agent -> Prepare action -> Human Approval -> Execute

18. Guardrails

Guardrails restrict or validate agent behavior.

Examples: - Input validation - Output validation - Permission checks -
Tool restrictions - Content filters - Maximum number of tool calls -
Maximum execution time - Human approval

Example:

Agent wants to delete database records | Permission Check | Approved? /
Yes No | | Execute Stop

19. Agent Evaluation

Agentic systems should be evaluated on more than final-answer quality.

Important metrics: - Task success rate - Tool selection accuracy - Tool
execution accuracy - Response correctness - Latency - Token usage -
Cost - Number of steps - Failure/retry rate - Safety violations

Example:

Task success = Successful tasks / Total tasks

20. Common Problems in Agentic AI

A. Hallucination The model may generate incorrect information.

B. Wrong Tool Selection The agent may choose an inappropriate tool.

C. Infinite Loops The agent may repeatedly perform the same action.

D. Excessive Tool Calls Too many calls increase latency and cost.

E. Context Overflow Long histories can exceed the model context window.

F. Prompt Injection Untrusted external content can attempt to manipulate
the agent.

G. Permission Problems An agent with excessive permissions can cause
unintended actions.

H. Unreliable Planning The initial plan may fail when the environment
changes.

21. Agent Security

Important principles: - Give agents only the permissions they need. -
Treat retrieved documents and web pages as untrusted input. - Validate
tool arguments. - Require approval for high-impact operations. - Log
tool calls. - Limit execution time and tool-call count. - Keep API keys
and secrets out of prompts. - Use environment variables or secret
managers.

22. Example: Customer Support Agent

Goal: “Resolve my billing issue.”

Possible process:

1.  Agent understands the problem.

2.  Search knowledge base.

3.  Check customer account.

4.  Identify billing issue.

5.  If refund is allowed, prepare refund.

6.  Request human approval if required.

7.  Execute refund.

8.  Update support ticket.

9.  Respond to customer.

10. Example: Coding Agent

Goal: “Fix the bug in my application.”

Possible loop:

1.  Read repository.

2.  Understand error.

3.  Inspect relevant files.

4.  Modify code.

5.  Run tests.

6.  Observe test results.

7.  Fix remaining failures.

8.  Run tests again.

9.  Provide final result.

10. Example: Data Analysis Agent

Goal: “Analyze sales performance.”

Agent can: 1. Query database. 2. Load data. 3. Clean data. 4. Calculate
metrics. 5. Generate charts. 6. Identify trends. 7. Produce a report.

25. Important Terms

LLM: Large Language Model.

Agent: An AI system that can reason, use tools, and perform actions
toward a goal.

Tool: An external function/API that an agent can call.

Memory: Information retained for use during or across tasks.

State: The current information available to an agent workflow.

RAG: Retrieval-Augmented Generation.

ReAct: Reasoning and Acting pattern.

Planning: Breaking a goal into actions.

Reflection: Evaluating an action/result and potentially correcting the
approach.

Guardrail: A constraint or validation mechanism that controls agent
behavior.

Human-in-the-loop: Human approval or intervention during agent
execution.

Orchestration: Managing how agents, tools, and workflows interact.

26. Interview Questions

Q1. What is Agentic AI? Answer: Agentic AI refers to AI systems capable
of pursuing goals by reasoning about tasks, selecting actions, using
tools, observing results, and adapting their approach.

Q2. What is the difference between an LLM and an AI agent? Answer: An
LLM primarily generates predictions or responses, while an AI agent
combines an LLM with tools, state/memory, and an execution loop to
perform multi-step tasks.

Q3. What is ReAct? Answer: ReAct is a pattern that combines reasoning
and action, allowing an agent to select actions, observe their results,
and continue based on those observations.

Q4. What is the difference between RAG and Agentic RAG? Answer:
Traditional RAG generally follows a retrieval pipeline, while Agentic
RAG allows an agent to decide when and how to retrieve information and
potentially use multiple retrieval steps or tools.

Q5. What is LangGraph? Answer: LangGraph is a framework for building
stateful, graph-based agent workflows with nodes, edges, conditional
routing, loops, persistence, and human-in-the-loop capabilities.

Q6. What is multi-agent AI? Answer: A multi-agent system consists of
multiple specialized agents that collaborate to complete a larger task.

Q7. Why are guardrails important? Answer: Guardrails reduce unsafe or
unintended behavior by validating inputs and outputs, restricting tools
and permissions, and requiring approval for sensitive actions.

27. Simple Mental Model

Remember Agentic AI as:

GOAL | PLAN | ACT | OBSERVE | REFLECT / RE-PLAN | ACT AGAIN | SUCCESS

The key difference is that an agent does not only “answer”; it can
decide what to do next and interact with external systems to accomplish
a goal.